The following tape contains lessons one
through five of the conversational
Cherokee course prepared by the Cherokee
Bilingual Education Program. Each lesson
begins with a dialogue with each phrase
recorded seven times. Listen to the first
three repetitions and repeat after the
fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh during
the pauses. Then continue with the drills
following the instructions provided in the
tape.
Conversational Cherokee Lesson 1.
Greetings. Hello John. OCO John. OCO John.
OCO John. OCO John. OCO John. OCO John.
Hello, Ann. Osiyo-an. Osiyo-an. Osiyo-an.
Osiyo-an. Osiyo-an.
How are you? Thank you.
Fine.
رفIG disposition
Yes, fine.
Ah, toh hiku. Ah, toh hiku. Ah, toh hiku.
Ah, toh hiku. Ah, toh hiku.
Additional vocabulary. Repetition. One.
Hiya, where's some? Hiya, where's some?
Two. Two.
Three.
Four.
Hiya, agye hyang.
Five. Hiya, achu jang.
Six.
Hiya, agye hyu jang.
Question drill. You will hear the
question, what is this, in Cherokee six
times. Give a one word answer using the
noun found in the corresponding six
sentences in the additional vocabulary
drill. One.
Where is some?
Where is some? Two. . .
Three. Three.
Aspala.
Four.
Agela.
Agela. Five.
repetition. In this drill, you will hear a
question with the six nouns, with each of
the six nouns used in the previous drills
questioned. That is, the question suffix
will be attached to these nouns. You will
then hear the answer. Repeat the answer,
which will be given twice.
Repeat. One.
Askaya Four
Agaya
Five
Five. Achooja.
Achooja.
Achooja. Achooja. Six. Agahooja.
Agahooja. Agahooja.
Conversation at normal speed. Do not
repeat. Listen for comprehension only.
Oseo, John. Oseo, huh? Tohechu. Toheku.
No, not Toheku. Uh, Toheku. End of lesson
one.
Lesson two, dialogue. Hello. Seyo. Seyo.
Seyo. Seyo.
Hello.
Do you speak English? English. Your
negative on this. Your negative on this.
Your negative on this. Your negative on
this.
Your negative on this.
Your negative on this. Your negative on
this. Yes, I speak English well. All
right, home.
What is your name?
My name is Bill Brown. I am Bill Brown. I
am Bill Brown. I am Bill Brown. I am Bill
Brown. I am Bill Brown. I am Bill Brown. I
am Bill Brown. I am Bill
Brown. I am Bill
Brown. And you? What is your name? on the
nearest shakey.
Henny, squirrel. Onsloly. On slowly, On
slowly, On slowly, On slowly, On slowly,
On slowly, On slowly. Do you want water?
Amastaduli, Amastaduli, Amastaduli,
Amastaduli, Amastaduli,
Amastaduli, Amastaduli.
Yes, I am thirsty for water.
Here is water. Ahanitan Ama. Ahanitan Ama.
Ahanitan Ama.
Ahanitan Ama. Ahanitan Ama. Ahanitan Ama.
Ahanitan Ama. Thanks. Wado, wado, wado,
wado, wado,
wado, wado.
Additional vocabulary repetition. Repeat
after each phrase. One.
Two.
Three.
his kanto ki his thena
five
his Karchode his Karchode
Six. Six.
Question drill. Listen to the question and
then give the answer. Model. Model. Is
this a boy? Yes, it's a boy.
One.
Two He asked,他要아げ He asked to get sit
Яформ mercado He asked to sit Three
I ordered a drink He asked statues
Kentucky.
Four. He asked Yachtena.
Dictulana.
Dictulana. Additional question, Driel.
Model, what is this? A woman. One. .
Again. .
After each question, , give the one word
answer which corresponds to the nouns in
numbers one through six. One. . Kadavusti
yaa. Kanagalausti.
Kanagalausti. Two. Kadavusti yaa. Yagi.
Yagi. Three. Kadavusti yaa. Kantoki.
Kantoki. Four.
Five.
Six.
Take two, Lena. Conversation at normal
speed. Do not repeat. Listen for
comprehension only. Siu. Oh, Siu. You want
to ask your own needs? Oh, I want to ask
my own needs. How do I do it? You can ask
Bill Brown. How do I do it? Oh, slowly.
How much do I do? Oh, how much do I do?
Oh, how much do I do? What do I do? Listen
once again.
End of lesson two.
Conversational Cherokee Lesson 3 Dialogue
with Mary and Charles Hello, Charles. See
you, Charles. See you, Charles. See you,
Charles. See you, Charles.
See you, Charles.
Hello, John.
Hello, Mary. See you, Mary. See you, Mary.
See you, Mary. See you, Mary.
See you, Mary. See you, Mary. See you,
Mary.
What are you doing?
I'm working.
What are you
building?
Jathaga Unniyasthi Jathaga Unniyasthi
Jathaga Unniyasthi Jathaga
Unniyasthi Jathaga Unniyasthi Jathaga
Unniyasthi
Give me a hammer. Ganai velocity has
consumed. Ganai velocity has consumed.
Ganai velocity has consumed.
Do you want
any nails?
Yes, I want nails.
Here are a hammer and nails.
I have not done anything wrong.
Thanks. Thanks. What don't? What don't?
What don't? What don't? What don't? What
don't? What don't? What don't? What don't?
End of the dialogue.
Additional vocabulary drill. One. Bill is
working.
Bill is speaking. Bill is speaking.
Bill is speaking.
Bill is building a house. We got so the
honest game
We got so the honest game
For bill is thinking we are downtown
We are downtown
Five. Bill is helping.
Six.
Bill is sleeping. We'll go to sleep.
We'll go to sleep.
Question Drill You will hear the question,
What is Bill doing? six times. Give a one
-word answer using the verb found in the
corresponding numbers of the additional
vocabulary drill.
One.
Too long . Too long . Two.
Go on me. Go on me. Three. Go on me.
Go on me. Go on me. Go on me. Go on me. Go
on me. Go on me. Go on me. Go on me. Go on
me. Go on me. Go on me. Go on
me.
Five. Six. Ten.
Twelve. Thirteen.
Fourteen.
Fifteen.
Dialogue at normal speed. Do not repeat.
Listen for comprehension only.
End of lesson three.
Thank you.